.. include:: ../general/glossary.rst

Malaria and vector terms
========================

The following terms are used to describe the biological processes involved in malaria and other
vector-borne diseases.

.. glossary::

    circumsporozoite protein (CSP)
        One of two proteins (the other being thrombospondin-related adhesive protein) involved in
        sporozoite recognition of host cells in malaria.

    cohort model
        A vector model that tracks properties of mosquito "cohorts", for example, population, age,
        gender, fertility, etc.

    cytokine
        Cytokines are small secreted proteins that are released by cells, and have specific effects
        on interactions and communications between cells. They are especially important in the immune
        system, and can function in inflammatory (and anti-inflammatory) response.

    CRISPR
        A genome-editing technique that utilizes the CRISPR/Cas9 system (a prokaryotic immune system)
        that can be used to splice DNA sequences in very specific target locations,  enabling the
        precise insertion or removal of genes of interest.

    entomological inoculation rate (EIR)
        The commonly-used measure of the intensity of malaria transmission. EIR is equal to the number
        of mosquito bites per night times the proportion of those bites that test positive for sporozoites.

    gametocyte
        The male and female sexual forms of the blood-stage malaria parasite. During blood-feeding,
        gametocytes are taken up into the mosquito mid-gut where they commence the mosquito-phase of
        the parasite life cycle.

    gene drive mosquito
        Gene drive is a genetic technique that promotes the inheritance of particular genes or specific
        genetic elements.  In mosquitoes, approaches are being tested that work to suppress the spread
        of malaria by creating mosquito lines through fertility suppression, driving-Y chromosomes,
        or express genes that limit malaria transmission.

    gonotrophic
        A female mosquito's feeding and egg-laying cycle, where the duration is defined as the average
        number of days that gravid mosquitoes take to oviposit after taking a blood meal.

    hepatocyte
       The cell type that comprises liver tissue.

    homing endonuclease genes (HEGs)
        "Selfish" genetic elements that can spread through the mosquito population even at a cost to
        the host. The HEG allele status is a tracked property of mosquitoes. Large numbers of HEG-
        positive mosquitoes may be introduced into the simulation by a *MosquitoRelease*
        intervention.

    individual mosquito model
        A vector model simulation where every individual mosquito in the population is modeled, as
        well as a simulation of a sampled subset of mosquitoes to represent the population as the
        whole.

    indoor residual spraying (IRS)
        The process of spraying insecticide on the interior surfaces of dwellings in order to repel
        or kill mosquitoes.

    insecticide-treated nets (ITN)
        Bednets hung over sleeping areas that are treated with insecticide to repel mosquitoes
        and kill those that land on them.

    larval habitat
        Mosquito larval ecology includes several habitat types including brackish swamp, constant,
        human population, temporary rainfall, and semi-permanent water vegetation.

    larvicide
        A node-targeted intervention that may be configured to have a direct killing effect on the
        larval population and a temporary reduction on available larval habitat.

    mass drug administration (MDA)
       The treatment of an entire population in a geographic area with a
       curative dose of an antimalarial drug without first testing for infection, and regardless of
       the presence of symptoms.

    merozoite
        The malaria parasite stage that invades red blood cells. After each cycle of asexual
        reproduction within the infected red blood cell, merozoites are released into the
        bloodstream to invade new red blood cells.

    merozoites
        see "merozoite"

    merozoite surface protein (MSP)
        A type of protein integral to red blood cell invasion by malaria parasites that is an important
        target of the human immune response.

    oviposition
        to deposit or lay eggs.

    pre-erythrocytic
        Stages of a malaria parasite that occur before the red blood cells are invaded. This
        includes the period starting from inoculation with sporozoites, through the liver-stage
        multiplication, up to infected hepatocyte rupture, and the first invasion of erythrocytes by
        merozoites.

    pre-erythrocytic vaccine (PEV)
        A vaccine targeted at the earliest stage of malaria parasite development, namely before the
        blood-stage infection. Other vaccines target the asexual and sexual stages of the parasite.

    Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1)
        A protein encoded by the malaria parasite and expressed on the surface of infected red blood
        cells. PfEMP1 adheres to various human receptors, allowing sequestration of parasitized red
        blood cells and avoidance of clearance in the spleen. PfEMP1 is an important antigenic
        target of the human adapted immune response. It exhibits a high degree of antigenic
        variation via a genetic switching mechanism evolved to escape immune pressure.

    schizont
        Cells formed during the asexual stage of the life cycle of sporozoan protozoans, such as the
        malaria parasite.

    spatial repellent
        An intervention that may be individually-distributed (protective indoors and outdoors), or
        node-distributed at the community-level, that repels mosquitoes from biting.

    sporogony
        The asexual process of spore formation in parasitic sporozoans.

    sporozoite
        a motile, spore-like stage of the malaria parasite that is the infectious agent introduced
        into the host.

    sugar-baited trap
        Bait stations, often placed inside houses, that have an attractive and toxic sugar used to
        attract and kill sugar-feeding male and female mosquitoes.

    superinfection
        The simultaneous infection with multiple strains of the same pathogen.

    transmission-blocking vaccine (TBV)
        A vaccine that blocks gametocytes from infected humans by producing viable sporozoites in
        mosquitoes. Also referred to as a "sexual-stage" vaccine, since vaccines in this class block
        gametocytes from infected humans by producing viable sporozoites in mosquitoes.

    vaccine intervention types
        In |EMOD_s|, vaccine intervention types are either "AcquisitionBlocking",
        "TransmissionBlocking" or "MortalityBlocking". For example, "mode-of-action", "targeted
        parasite stages", (such as pre-erythrocytic, asexual, or sexual), etc.

    vector
        Insect or other living carrier that transmits an infectious agent. The vector life cycle and
        feeding cycle in the model are described in the article `Eckhoff, Malaria Journal 2011,
        10:303`_.

    vectorial capacity
        The daily rate of all mosquitoes that would be infected after biting a single infectious host.
        This measure can be used to describe the transmission intensity of malaria, and serves as a
        rate at which future infections arise from a currently infected host.

    vector model
        The vector model includes both a :term:`cohort model` and an :term:`individual mosquito model`. The
        model is a closed-loop feeding cycle where successful animal feeds (both indoors and
        outdoors) produce eggs, larva, vector mating, and then, adult mosquitoes. The vector model
        inherits the same human- infection model structure from the generic simulation type:
        uninfected, latent incubation, infectious, multiple immune variables, and superinfection.
        However, the transmission of infections is not between individual humans, but rather via the
        human-to-vector and vector- to-human pathways.

    Wolbachia
        This is a genus of bacteria that infects many arthopod species (especially insects). It has
        been discovered that insects infected with Wolbachia  have increased resistance to viral
        or other parasitic infections. Work is underway to determine if strains of modified Wolbachia
        can be used to control malaria, by effectively preventing mosquitoes from becoming
        infected with  *Plasmodium* parasites.

.. _Eckhoff, Malaria Journal 2011, 10:303: http://www.malariajournal.com/content/10/1/303
